The Reverend Mr. Simon Rolles had distinguished himself in the Moral
Sciences, and was more than usually proficient in the study of Divinity.
His essay "On the Christian Doctrine of the Social Obligations" obtained
for him, at the moment of its production, a certain celebrity in the
University of Oxford; and it was understood in clerical and learned
circles that young Mr. Rolles had in contemplation a considerable
work--a folio, it was said--on the authority of the Fathers of the
Church. These attainments, these ambitious designs, however, were far
from helping him to any preferment; and he was still in quest of his
first curacy when a chance ramble in that part of London, the peaceful
and rich aspect of the garden, a desire for solitude and study, and the
cheapness of the lodging, led him to take up his abode with Mr. Raeburn,
the nurseryman of Stockdove Lane.

It was his habit every afternoon, after he had worked seven or eight
hours on St. Ambrose or St. Chrysostom, to walk for a while in
meditation among the roses. And this was usually one of the most
productive moments of his day. But even a sincere appetite for thought,
and the excitement of grave problems awaiting solution, are not always
sufficient to preserve the mind of the philosopher against the petty
shocks and contacts of the world. And when Mr. Rolles found General
Vandeleur's secretary, ragged and bleeding, in the company of his
landlord; when he saw both change colour and seek to avoid his
questions; and, above all, when the former denied his own identity with
the most unmoved assurance, he speedily forgot the Saints and Fathers in
the vulgar interest of curiosity.

"I cannot be mistaken," thought he. "That is Mr. Hartley beyond a doubt.
How comes he in such a pickle? why does he deny his name? and what can
be his business with that black-looking ruffian, my landlord?"

As he was thus reflecting, another peculiar circumstance attracted his
attention. The face of Mr. Raeburn appeared at a low window next the
door; and, as chance directed, his eyes met those of Mr. Rolles. The
nurseryman seemed disconcerted, and even alarmed; and immediately after
the blind of the apartment was pulled sharply down.

"This may all be very well," reflected Mr. Rolles; "it may be all
excellently well; but I confess freely that I do not think so.
Suspicious, underhand, untruthful, fearful of observation--I believe
upon my soul," he thought, "the pair are plotting some disgraceful
action."

The detective that there is in all of us awoke and became clamant in the
bosom of Mr. Rolles; and with a brisk, eager step, that bore no
resemblance to his usual gait, he proceeded to make the circuit of the
garden. When he came to the scene of Harry's escalade, his eye was at
once arrested by a broken rose-bush and marks of trampling on the mould.
He looked up, and saw scratches on the brick, and a rag of trouser
floating from a broken bottle. This, then, was the mode of entrance
chosen by Mr. Raeburn's particular friend! It was thus that General
Vandeleur's secretary came to admire a flower-garden! The young
clergyman whistled softly to himself as he stooped to examine the
ground. He could make out where Harry had landed from his perilous leap;
he recognised the flat foot of Mr. Raeburn where it had sunk deeply in
the soil as he pulled up the secretary by the collar; nay, on a closer
inspection, he seemed to distinguish the marks of groping fingers, as
though something had been spilt abroad and eagerly collected.

"Upon my word," he thought, "the thing grows vastly interesting."

And just then he caught sight of something almost entirely buried in the
earth. In an instant he had disinterred a dainty morocco case,
ornamented and clasped in gilt. It had been trodden heavily underfoot,
and thus escaped the hurried search of Mr. Raeburn. Mr. Rolles opened
the case, and drew a long breath of almost horrified astonishment; for
there lay before him, in a cradle of green velvet, a diamond of
prodigious magnitude and of the finest water. It was of the bigness of a
duck's egg; beautifully shaped, and without a flaw; and as the sun shone
upon it, it gave forth a lustre like that of electricity, and seemed to
burn in his hand with a thousand internal fires.

He knew little of precious stones; but the Rajah's Diamond was a wonder
that explained itself; a village child, if he found it, would run
screaming for the nearest cottage; and a savage would prostrate himself
in adoration before so imposing a fetich. The beauty of the stone
flattered the young clergyman's eyes; the thought of its incalculable
value overpowered his intellect. He knew that what he held in his hand
was worth more than many years' purchase of an archiepiscopal see; that
it would build cathedrals more stately than Ely or Cologne; that he who
possessed it was set free for ever from the primal curse, and might
follow his own inclinations without concern or hurry, without let or
hindrance. And as he suddenly turned it, the rays leaped forth again
with renewed brilliancy, and seemed to pierce his very heart.

Decisive actions are often taken in a moment and without any conscious
deliverance from the rational parts of man. So it was now with Mr.
Rolles. He glanced hurriedly round; beheld, like Mr. Raeburn before him,
nothing but the sunlit flower-garden, the tall tree-tops, and the house
with blinded windows; and in a trice he had shut the case, thrust it
into his pocket, and was hastening to his study with the speed of guilt.

The Reverend Simon Rolles had stolen the Rajah's Diamond.

Early in the afternoon the police arrived with Harry Hartley. The
nurseryman, who was beside himself with terror, readily discovered his
hoard; and the jewels were identified and inventoried in the presence of
the secretary. As for Mr. Rolles, he showed himself in a most obliging
temper, communicated what he knew with freedom, and professed regret
that he could do no more to help the officers in their duty.

"Still," he added, "I suppose your business is nearly at an end."

"By no means," replied the man from Scotland Yard; and he narrated the
second robbery of which Harry had been the immediate victim, and gave
the young clergyman a description of the more important jewels that were
still not found, dilating particularly on the Rajah's Diamond.

"It must be worth a fortune," observed Mr. Rolles.

"Ten fortunes--twenty fortunes," cried the officer.

"The more it is worth," remarked Simon shrewdly, "the more difficult it
must be to sell. Such a thing has a physiognomy not to be disguised, and
I should fancy a man might as easily negotiate St. Paul's Cathedral."

"Oh, truly!" said the officer; "but if the thief be a man of any
intelligence, he will cut it into three or four, and there will be still
enough to make him rich."

"Thank you," said the clergyman. "You cannot imagine how much your
conversation interests me."

Whereupon the functionary admitted that they knew many strange things in
his profession, and immediately after took his leave.

Mr. Rolles regained his apartment. It seemed smaller and barer than
usual; the materials for his great work had never presented so little
interest; and he looked upon his library with the eye of scorn. He took
down, volume by volume, several Fathers of the Church, and glanced them
through; but they contained nothing to his purpose.

"These old gentlemen," thought he, "are no doubt very valuable writers,
but they seem to me conspicuously ignorant of life. Here am I, with
learning enough to be a Bishop, and I positively do not know how to
dispose of a stolen diamond. I glean a hint from a common policeman,
and, with all my folios, I cannot so much as put it into execution. This
inspires me with very low ideas of University training."

Herewith he kicked over his book-shelf and, putting on his hat, hastened
from the house to the club of which he was a member. In such a place of
mundane resort he hoped to find some man of good counsel and a shrewd
experience in life. In the reading-room he saw many of the country
clergy and an Archdeacon; there were three journalists and a writer upon
the Higher Metaphysic, playing pool; and at dinner only the raff of
ordinary club frequenters showed their commonplace and obliterated
countenances. None of these, thought Mr. Rolles, would know more on
dangerous topics than he knew himself; none of them were fit to give him
guidance in his present strait. At length, in the smoking-room, up many
weary stairs, he hit upon a gentleman of somewhat portly build and
dressed with conspicuous plainness. He was smoking a cigar and reading
the _Fortnightly_ _Review_; his face was singularly free from all sign
of preoccupation or fatigue; and there was something in his air which
seemed to invite confidence and to expect submission. The more the young
clergyman scrutinised his features, the more he was convinced that he
had fallen on one capable of giving pertinent advice.

"Sir," said he, "you will excuse my abruptness; but I judge you from
your appearance to be pre-eminently a man of the world."

"I have indeed considerable claims to that distinction," replied the
stranger, laying aside his magazine with a look of mingled amusement and
surprise.

"I, sir," continued the curate, "am a recluse, a student, a creature of
ink-bottles and patristic folios. A recent event has brought my folly
vividly before my eyes, and I desire to instruct myself in life. By
life," he added, "I do not mean Thackeray's novels; but the crimes and
secret possibilities of our society, and the principles of wise conduct
among exceptional events. I am a patient reader; can the thing be learnt
in books?"

"You put me in a difficulty," said the stranger. "I confess I have no
great notion of the use of books, except to amuse a railway journey;
although, I believe, there are some very exact treatises on astronomy,
the use of the globes, agriculture, and the art of making paper-flowers.
Upon the less apparent provinces of life I fear you will find nothing
truthful. Yet stay," he added, "have you read Gaboriau?"

Mr. Rolles admitted that he had never even heard the name.

"You may gather some notions from Gaboriau," resumed the stranger. "He
is at least suggestive; and as he is an author much studied by Prince
Bismarck, you will, at the worst, lose your time in good society."

"Sir," said the curate, "I am infinitely obliged by your politeness."

"You have already more than repaid me," returned the other.

"How?" inquired Simon.

"By the novelty of your request," replied the gentleman; and with a
polite gesture, as though to ask permission, he resumed the study of the
_Fortnightly Review_.

On his way home Mr. Rolles purchased a work on precious stones and
several of Gaboriau's novels. These last he eagerly skimmed until an
advanced hour in the morning; but although they introduced him to many
new ideas, he could nowhere discover what to do with a stolen diamond.
He was annoyed, moreover, to find the information scattered amongst
romantic story-telling, instead of soberly set forth after the manner of
a manual; and he concluded that, even if the writer had thought much
upon these subjects, he was totally lacking in educational method. For
the character and attainments of Lecoq, however, he was unable to
contain his admiration.

"He was truly a great creature," ruminated Mr. Rolles. "He knew the
world as I know Paley's Evidences. There was nothing that he could not
carry to a termination with his own hand, and against the largest odds.
Heavens!" he broke out suddenly, "is not this the lesson? Must I not
learn to cut diamonds for myself?"

It seemed to him as if he had sailed at once out of his perplexities; he
remembered that he knew a jeweller, one B. Macculloch, in Edinburgh, who
would be glad to put him in the way of the necessary training; a few
months, perhaps a few years, of sordid toil, and he would be
sufficiently expert to divide and sufficiently cunning to dispose with
advantage of the Rajah's Diamond. That done, he might return to pursue
his researches at leisure, a wealthy and luxurious student, envied and
respected by all. Golden visions attended him through his slumber, and
he awoke refreshed and light-hearted with the morning sun.

Mr. Raeburn's house was on that day to be closed by the police, and this
afforded a pretext for his departure. He cheerfully prepared his
baggage, transported it to King's Cross, where he left it in the
cloak-room, and returned to the club to while away the afternoon and
dine.

"If you dine here to-day, Rolles," observed an acquaintance, "you may
see two of the most remarkable men in England--Prince Florizel of
Bohemia, and old Jack Vandeleur."

"I have heard of the Prince," replied Mr. Rolles; "and General Vandeleur
I have even met in society."

"General Vandeleur is an ass!" returned the other. "This is his brother
John, the biggest adventurer, the best judge of precious stones, and one
of the most acute diplomatists in Europe. Have you never heard of his
duel with the Duc de Val d'Orge? of his exploits and atrocities when he
was Dictator of Paraguay? of his dexterity in recovering Sir Samuel
Levi's jewellery? nor of his services in the Indian Mutiny--services by
which the Government profited, but which the Government dared not
recognise? You make me wonder what we mean by fame, or even by infamy;
for Jack Vandeleur has prodigious claims to both. Run down-stairs," he
continued, "take a table near them, and keep your ears open. You will
hear some strange talk, or I am much misled."

"But how shall I know them?" inquired the clergyman.

"Know them!" cried his friend; "why, the Prince is the finest gentleman
in Europe, the only living creature who looks like a king; and as for
Jack Vandeleur, if you can imagine Ulysses at seventy years of age, and
with a sabre-cut across his face, you have the man before you! Know
them, indeed! Why, you could pick either of them out of a Derby day!"

Rolles eagerly hurried to the dining-room. It was as his friend had
asserted; it was impossible to mistake the pair in question. Old John
Vandeleur was of a remarkable force of body, and obviously broken to the
most difficult exercises. He had neither the carriage of a swordsman,
nor of a sailor, nor yet of one much inured to the saddle; but something
made up of all these, and the result and expression of many different
habits and dexterities. His features were bold and aquiline; his
expression arrogant and predatory; his whole appearance that of a swift,
violent, unscrupulous man of action; and his copious white hair and the
deep sabre-cut that traversed his nose and temple added a note of
savagery to a head already remarkable and menacing in itself.

In his companion, the Prince of Bohemia, Mr. Rolles was astonished to
recognise the gentleman who had recommended him the study of Gaboriau.
Doubtless Prince Florizel, who rarely visited the club, of which, as of
most others, he was an honorary member, had been waiting for John
Vandeleur when Simon accosted him on the previous evening.

The other diners had modestly retired into the angles of the room, and
left the distinguished pair in a certain isolation, but the young
clergyman was unrestrained by any sentiment of awe, and, marching boldly
up, took his place at the nearest table.

The conversation was, indeed, new to the student's ears. The ex-Dictator
of Paraguay stated many extraordinary experiences in different quarters
of the world; and the Prince supplied a commentary which, to a man of
thought, was even more interesting than the events themselves. Two forms
of experience were thus brought together and laid before the young
clergyman; and he did not know which to admire the most--the desperate
actor or the skilled expert in life; the man who spoke boldly of his own
deeds and perils, or the man who seemed, like a god, to know all things
and to have suffered nothing. The manner of each aptly fitted with his
part in the discourse. The Dictator indulged in brutalities alike of
speech and gesture; his hand opened and shut and fell roughly on the
table; and his voice was loud and heady. The Prince, on the other hand,
seemed the very type of urbane docility and quiet; the least movement,
the least inflection, had with him a weightier significance than all the
shouts and pantomime of his companion; and if ever, as must frequently
have been the case, he described some experience personal to himself, it
was so aptly dissimulated as to pass unnoticed with the rest.

At length the talk wandered on to the late robberies and the Rajah's
Diamond.

"That diamond would be better in the sea," observed Prince Florizel.

"As a Vandeleur," replied the Dictator, "your Highness may imagine my
dissent."

"I speak on grounds of public policy," pursued the Prince. "Jewels so
valuable should be reserved for the collection of a Prince or the
treasury of a great nation. To hand them about among the common sort of
men is to set a price on Virtue's head; and if the Rajah of Kashgar--a
Prince, I understand, of great enlightenment--desired vengeance upon the
men of Europe, he could hardly have gone more efficaciously about his
purpose than by sending us this apple of discord. There is no honesty
too robust for such a trial. I myself, who have many duties and many
privileges of my own--I myself, Mr. Vandeleur, could scarce handle the
intoxicating crystal and be safe. As for you, who are a diamond-hunter
by taste and profession, I do not believe there is a crime in the
calendar you would not perpetrate--I do not believe you have a friend in
the world whom you would not eagerly betray--I do not know if you have a
family, but if you have I declare you would sacrifice your children--and
all this for what? Not to be richer, nor to have more comforts or more
respect, but simply to call this diamond yours for a year or two until
you die, and now and again to open a safe and look at it as one looks at
a picture."

"It is true," replied Vandeleur. "I have hunted most things, from men
and women down to mosquitoes; I have dived for coral; I have followed
both whales and tigers; and a diamond is the tallest quarry of the lot.
It has beauty and worth; it alone can properly reward the ardours of the
chase. At this moment, as your Highness may fancy, I am upon the trail;
I have a sure knack, a wide experience; I know every stone of price in
my brother's collection as a shepherd knows his sheep; and I wish I may
die if I do not recover them every one."

"Sir Thomas Vandeleur will have great cause to thank you," said the
Prince.

"I am not so sure," returned the Dictator, with a laugh. "One of the
Vandeleurs will. Thomas or John--Peter or Paul--we are all apostles."

"I did not catch your observation," said the Prince, with some disgust.

And at the same moment the waiter informed Mr. Vandeleur that his cab
was at the door.

Mr. Rolles glanced at the clock, and saw that he also must be moving;
and the coincidence struck him sharply and unpleasantly, for he desired
to see no more of the diamond-hunter.

Much study having somewhat shaken the young man's nerves, he was in the
habit of travelling in the most luxurious manner; and for the present
journey he had taken a sofa in the sleeping carriage.

"You will be very comfortable," said the guard; "there is no one in your
compartment, and only one old gentleman in the other end."

It was close upon the hour, and the tickets were being examined, when
Mr. Rolles beheld this other fellow-passenger ushered by several porters
into his place; certainly, there was not another man in the world whom
he would not have preferred--for it was old John Vandeleur, the
ex-Dictator.

The sleeping carriages on the Great Northern line were divided into
three compartments--one at each end for travellers, and one in the
centre fitted with the conveniences of a lavatory. A door running in
grooves separated each of the others from the lavatory; but as there
were neither bolts nor locks, the whole suite was practically common
ground.

When Mr. Rolles had studied his position, he perceived himself without
defence. If the Dictator chose to pay him a visit in the course of the
night, he could do no less than receive it; he had no means of
fortification, and lay open to attack as if he had been lying in the
fields. This situation caused him some agony of mind. He recalled with
alarm the boastful statements of his fellow-traveller across the
dining-table, and the professions of immorality which he had heard him
offering to the disgusted Prince. Some persons, he remembered to have
read, are endowed with a singular quickness of perception for the
neighbourhood of precious metals; through walls and even at considerable
distances they are said to divine the presence of gold. Might it not be
the same with diamonds? he wondered; and if so, who was more likely to
enjoy this transcendental sense than the person who gloried in the
appellation of the Diamond Hunter? From such a man he recognised that he
had everything to fear, and longed eagerly for the arrival of the day.

In the meantime he neglected no precaution, concealed his diamond in the
most internal pocket of a system of great-coats, and devoutly
recommended himself to the care of Providence.

The train pursued its usual even and rapid course; and nearly half the
journey had been accomplished before slumber began to triumph over
uneasiness in the breast of Mr. Rolles. For some time he resisted its
influence; but it grew upon him more and more, and a little before York
he was fain to stretch himself upon one of the couches and suffer his
eyes to close; and almost at the same instant consciousness deserted the
young clergyman. His last thought was of his terrifying neighbour.

When he awoke it was still pitch dark, except for the flicker of the
veiled lamp; and the continual roaring and oscillation testified to the
unrelaxed velocity of the train. He sat upright in a panic, for he had
been tormented by the most uneasy dreams; it was some seconds before he
recovered his self-command; and even after he had resumed a recumbent
attitude sleep continued to flee him, and he lay awake with his brain in
a state of violent agitation, and his eyes fixed upon the lavatory door.
He pulled his clerical felt hat over his brow still further to shield
him from the light; and he adopted the usual expedients, such as
counting a thousand or banishing thought, by which experienced invalids
are accustomed to woo the approach of sleep. In the case of Mr. Rolles
they proved one and all vain; he was harassed by a dozen different
anxieties--the old man in the other end of the carriage haunted him in
the most alarming shapes; and in whatever attitude he chose to lie, the
diamond in his pocket occasioned him a sensible physical distress. It
burned, it was too large; it bruised his ribs; and there were
infinitesimal fractions of a second in which he had half a mind to throw
it from the window.

While he was thus lying, a strange incident took place.

The sliding-door into the lavatory stirred a little, and then a little
more, and was finally drawn back for the space of about twenty inches.
The lamp in the lavatory was unshaded, and in the lighted aperture thus
disclosed Mr. Rolles could see the head of Mr. Vandeleur in an attitude
of deep attention. He was conscious that the gaze of the Dictator rested
intently on his own face; and the instinct of self-preservation moved
him to hold his breath, to refrain from the least movement, and, keeping
his eyes lowered, to watch his visitor from underneath the lashes. After
about a moment, the head was withdrawn and the door of the lavatory
replaced.

The Dictator had not come to attack, but to observe; his action was not
that of a man threatening another, but that of a man who was himself
threatened; if Mr. Rolles was afraid of him, it appeared that he, in his
turn, was not quite easy on the score of Mr. Rolles. He had come, it
would seem, to make sure that his only fellow-traveller was asleep; and,
when satisfied on that point, he had at once withdrawn.

The clergyman leaped to his feet. The extreme of terror had given place
to a reaction of foolhardy daring. He reflected that the rattle of the
flying train concealed all other sounds, and determined, come what
might, to return the visit he had just received. Divesting himself of
his cloak, which might have interfered with the freedom of his action,
he entered the lavatory and paused to listen. As he had expected, there
was nothing to be heard above the roar of the train's progress; and
laying his hand on the door at the farther side, he proceeded cautiously
to draw it back for about six inches. Then he stopped, and could not
contain an ejaculation of surprise.

John Vandeleur wore a fur travelling-cap with lappets to protect his
ears; and this may have combined with the sound of the express to keep
him in ignorance of what was going forward. It is certain, at least,
that he did not raise his head, but continued without interruption to
pursue his strange employment. Between his feet stood an open hat-box;
in one hand he held the sleeve of his sealskin greatcoat; in the other a
formidable knife, with which he had just slit up the lining of the
sleeve. Mr. Rolles had read of persons carrying money in a belt; and as
he had no acquaintance with any but cricket-belts, he had never been
able rightly to conceive how this was managed. But here was a stranger
thing before his eyes; for John Vandeleur, it appeared, carried diamonds
in the lining of his sleeve; and even as the young clergyman gazed, he
could see one glittering brilliant drop after another into the hat-box.

He stood riveted to the spot, following this unusual business with his
eyes. The diamonds were, for the most part, small, and not easily
distinguishable either in shape or fire. Suddenly the Dictator appeared
to find a difficulty; he employed both hands and stooped over his task;
but it was not until after considerable manoeuvring that he extricated
a large tiara of diamonds from the lining, and held it up for some
seconds' examination before he placed it with the others in the hat-box.
The tiara was a ray of light to Mr. Rolles; he immediately recognised
it for a part of the treasure stolen from Harry Hartley by the loiterer.
There was no room for mistake; it was exactly as the detective had
described it; there were the ruby stars, with a great emerald in the
centre; there were the interlacing crescents; and there were the
pear-shaped pendants, each a single stone, which gave a special value to
Lady Vandeleur's tiara.

Mr. Rolles was hugely relieved. The Dictator was as deeply in the affair
as he was; neither could tell tales upon the other. In the first glow of
happiness, the clergyman suffered a deep sigh to escape him; and as his
bosom had become choked and his throat dry during his previous suspense,
the sigh was followed by a cough.

Mr. Vandeleur looked up; his face contracted with the blackest and most
deadly passion; his eyes opened widely, and his under jaw dropped in an
astonishment that was upon the brink of fury. By an instinctive movement
he had covered the hat-box with the coat. For half a minute the two men
stared upon each other in silence. It was not a long interval, but it
sufficed for Mr. Rolles; he was one of those who think swiftly on
dangerous occasions; he decided on a course of action of a singularly
daring nature; and although he felt he was setting his life upon the
hazard, he was the first to break silence.

"I beg your pardon," said he.

The Dictator shivered slightly, and when he spoke his voice was hoarse.

"What do you want here?" he asked.

"I take a particular interest in diamonds," replied Mr. Rolles, with an
air of perfect self-possession. "Two connoisseurs should be acquainted.
I have here a trifle of my own which may perhaps serve for an
introduction."

And so saying, he quietly took the case from his pocket, showed the
Rajah's Diamond to the Dictator for an instant, and replaced it in
security.

"It was once your brother's," he added.

John Vandeleur continued to regard him with a look of almost painful
amazement; but he neither spoke nor moved.

"I was pleased to observe," resumed the young man, "that we have gems
from the same collection."

The Dictator's surprise overpowered him.

"I beg your pardon," he said; "I begin to perceive that I am growing
old! I am positively not prepared for little incidents like this. But
set my mind at rest upon one point: do my eyes deceive me, or are you
indeed a parson?"

"I am in holy orders," answered Mr. Rolles.

"Well," cried the other, "as long as I live I will never hear another
word against the cloth!"

"You flatter me," said Mr. Rolles.

"Pardon me," replied Vandeleur; "pardon me, young man. You are no
coward, but it still remains to be seen whether you are not the worst of
fools. Perhaps," he continued, leaning back upon his seat, "perhaps you
would oblige me with a few particulars. I must suppose you had some
object in the stupefying impudence of your proceedings, and I confess I
have a curiosity to know it."

"It is very simple," replied the clergyman; "it proceeds from my great
inexperience of life."

"I shall be glad to be persuaded," answered Vandeleur.

Whereupon Mr. Rolles told him the whole story of his connection with the
Rajah's Diamond, from the time he found it in Raeburn's garden to the
time when he left London in the Flying Scotchman. He added a brief
sketch of his feelings and thoughts during the journey, and concluded in
these words:--

"When I recognised the tiara I knew we were in the same attitude towards
Society, and this inspired me with a hope, which I trust you will not
say was ill-founded, that you might become in some sense my partner in
the difficulties and, of course, the profits of my situation. To one of
your special knowledge and obviously great experience the negotiation of
the diamond would give but little trouble, while to me it was a matter
of impossibility. On the other part, I judged that I might lose nearly
as much by cutting the diamond, and that not improbably with an
unskilful hand, as might enable me to pay you with proper generosity for
your assistance. The subject was a delicate one to broach; and perhaps I
fell short in delicacy. But I must ask you to remember that for me the
situation was a new one, and I was entirely unacquainted with the
etiquette in use. I believe without vanity that I could have married or
baptised you in a very acceptable manner; but every man has his own
aptitudes, and this sort of bargain was not among the lists of my
accomplishments."

"I do not wish to flatter you," replied Vandeleur; "but upon my word,
you have an unusual disposition for a life of crime. You have more
accomplishments than you imagine; and though I have encountered a number
of rogues in different quarters of the world, I never met with one so
unblushing as yourself. Cheer up, Mr. Rolles, you are in the right
profession at last! As for helping you, you may command me as you will.
I have only a day's business in Edinburgh on a little matter for my
brother; and once that is concluded, I return to Paris, where I usually
reside. If you please, you may accompany me thither. And before the end
of a month I believe I shall have brought your little business to a
satisfactory conclusion."
